---
layout: post
pageclass: blog
title: "Mulch"
published: true
---
Don't be the gardener who is cursing in July while hoeing or hand-weeding overgrown weeds in the blazing sun. There is an easier way, it's mulch. When you mulch you weed much less, you water less, and your soil is moister in mid-summer. Trust us, you want to mulch and your plants will thank you too.

Many gardeners in this garden use plastic mulch, which comes in sheets that you roll out and pin down with metal or plastic pegs. The problem with plastic sheets is that it does not decompose, so your soil gets no benefit. Then you've got the plastic waste itself every year, that's not good.

The other popular choice is straw or hay, which you can buy in bales from Home Depot or Loew's, or any garden center. The key to using hay is to put it down *thickly*. If you can see the soil through the hay then the weeds will grow. Put a layer down that's *at least* 6" deep. Over the season the hay slowly decomposes, so don't be stingy!

Bear in mind that straw is an insulator so if you lay it down on cool soil that soil is going to heat up more slowly.

A 21st century black mulch which also comes in sheets is [BioTelo Biodegradable Mulch](http://www.johnnyseeds.com/p-6978-biotelo-biodegradable-mulch-4-5-x-32.aspx). The material is made from corn and decomposes over the season and then you end up with improved soil over time, if you till the mulch in. You could also lay straw on top of this but this is probably not necessary.

You want to put the plastic or BioTelo down early in the season, for 2 reasons. One, this prevents the weeds from growing. Less weeding is always good. Two, your soil is going to heat up faster with this mulch in place, which the heat-loving plants like tomatoes and peppers are going to like.

You can get [BioTelo Biodegradable Mulch from Johnny's Seeds](http://www.johnnyseeds.com/p-6978-biotelo-biodegradable-mulch-4-5-x-32.aspx "paper mulch"). For my full plot I use 2 rolls. I also use a bale of straw where I don't put down BioTelo, this lasts the entire season.

You can get also get straw at:

-   [Matterhorn Nursery](http://maps.google.com/maps?client=safari&rls=en&oe=UTF-8&um=1&ie=UTF-8&q=matterhorn+nursery+ny&fb=1&gl=us&hq=matterhorn+nursery&hnear=New+York,+NY&cid=0,0,9086151225230858574&ei=Z09sTeemIIGs8AbWkZCXCw&sa=X&oi=local_result&ct=image&resnum=2&ved=0CCUQnwIwAQ "matterhorn nursery"), Spring Valley

*Brian O*

